I'm Vicki MacDonald and I'm in Holy Trinity Church, interviewing people as part of the
Longest Yarn. I'm with Bithig Cole and she's going to talk about her childhood during the
war in Anglesey and also other memories. Thank you Bithig. So do you want to start and tell
me a little bit about being a child during the war in Anglesey?
Yes. I was born in 1933, so when the war broke out I was sort of six, wasn't I? And just
remember the sort of fear and worry about everything. It didn't really mean much to
me as a child. And the things that happened, sort of the school, our schoolmaster was very,
very keen that we knew about the war. And this really, I can't say that we suffered terrible
hardship because we lived on the farm so we had plenty of food. But the one thing I remember
particularly was not being able to use the car. So we went everywhere by pony and trap.
Which, you know, now I think about it, it sounds quite romantic, but if you went to
visit family in the evenings in the winter it was not fun. And one thing I remember that
was the sound of the planes because then valley was becoming quite important and there was
always the hum and it was always the, is it one of theirs or is it one of ours? You know,
that sort of fear. And listening to the radio, always had to listen to the news, didn't you?
And there were some days when the batteries had run down. My word, that was the end of
the world, wasn't it? Yeah, sort of lots of interesting things. I remember this African,
they said she was, lady used to come around and talk to the schools. In fact, I think
it turned out that she was a spy that was going around. Yeah. Yeah, it's some very
happy things as well. One unhappy thing, unfortunately, was my father died in 1943. Died suddenly,
had septicemia. That was quite a change in our lives. But when I talk to other people,
as I said, I married a man from Kent and when he talks about, talked about his experiences,
their life was so different from ours. He talks about spending sort of half their nights
in shelters and, you know, all these bombs falling around them and that sort of thing.
We did have a few bombs in Anglesey, but nothing to speak of really. And one big event I remembered
was that a plane came down on a farm about three miles from us. And I suppose it was
a Spitfire or something, because I remember thinking it wasn't very big. You know, for a
sort of six-year-old to think that, it can't have been very big, can it? But everybody was there
around it, you know. And I suppose, really, that was one of the sort of biggest events that I can
remember. So did your mother cope on the farm on her own or did she have family who you could get
in? She coped for two years and then she remarried. And yes, she did. She did cope. She was an amazing
woman, really. It must have been very hard because you were in the middle of a war and your father
had died suddenly. Yes, it was. But in those days, I don't know, children worked. And I can
not remember, not working, really. I used to sort of go and feed the pigs, sort of, and even doing
milking at eight years old. So it was hard, but I suppose because my mother was such a strong woman,
she made life easy for us, really. That sounds amazing. And thank you so much.